Protecting Indonesia's Rainforests

Indonesia’s Rainforests – Keeping Our Planet A Little Cooler


Indonesia is home to some of the most ecologically important stands of tropical rainforest in the world. Between providing habitat for important species and keeping a wealth of carbon out of our atmosphere, these unique ecosystems have everything – everything but protection that is. Demand for North American paper and clothing is helping drive their destruction.

Animals from Our Story Books



The biodiversity of Indonesia’s rainforests is among the planet’s highest: orangutans, tigers, elephants and rhinos all call them home. These days, home is a pretty risky place. All of these mammals, and countless other species, are listed as critically endangered, due largely to habitat destruction from deforestation.

Indonesia’s forests contain:

10% of the world’s mammal species
16% of our planet’s bird species
11% of earth’s plant species
Logging these rich biospheres simply for pulp and paper, then replacing them with acacia tree and palm oil plantations or using trees for our clothing is the forest equivalent of paving paradise to put up a parking lot.

The Sumatran elephant population might become extinguished in the Bukit Tigapuluh Forest Landscape thanks to a new plantation recently approved by the government.  And of the 500 or so remaining Sumatran tigers, it is estimated that at least 20% live on unprotected land at high risk for logging. For orangutans, life is not better. A 2003 report from the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species counted 7,300 Sumatran orangutans in the wild. That number has since declined to a conservative estimate of 6,600 and it is thought Sumatran orangutans will be the first Great Ape species to go extinct.

A Growing Threat: Trees in Our Clothes?

About 30% of Indonesia’s rainforest loss is directly attributable to conversion to pulpwood plantations compounding other stresses on rainforest including palm oil plantations, and paper products. In 2010, Canopy carried out research to uncover future threats to global forests and discovered that dissolving pulps is an aggressively expanding sector for the forest industry and a major emerging threat to ancient and endangered forests. The result of a chemical intensive and grossly inefficient pulping process, dissolving pulps are the basis for a variety of products from food, to electronics and eye-ware.

Dissolving pulps are also the basis for rayon, viscose, Tencel™, lyocell and modal, fibers that are increasingly important for the global fabric and clothing industries. In fact, there has been a 12% jump in their use during the past three years and they are projected to grow aggressively over the next 5-20 years. Indonesia already has a controversial and growing dissolving pulp mill along with several viscose mills and a significant amount of wood flows out of the country to feed other South East Asian dissolving pulp mills.

The Paper Trail to Canada and the US

About 30% of Indonesia’s rainforest loss is linked to pulpwood plantations[2]. Rainforest cleared for palm oil plantations also end up in paper products. China is taking an increasingly large market share of world paper production and sources much of its pulp from Canada’s forests and Indonesian rainforests and plantations. A recent report by the Rainforest Action Network[3] found that 90% of US children’s book publishers carried books that contained fibres stemming from rainforest destruction. Other studies show similar results for European children’s books[4].

Carbon Emissions



Breakneck bulldozing

Indonesia is deforesting at an alarming rate – 40% of its forest has disappeared in the last 50 years. The country’s greenhouse gas emissions account for almost 5% of the global total[1], and about 85% of that comes from deforestation and land use. Almost singlehandedly, then, this process has made this largely rural country the world’s third largest emitter of greenhouse gases, second only to China and the US.

Policy Moves

Asia Pulp and Paper (APP) marked the first anniversary of its Forest Conservation Policy with an event in Jakarta Indonesia on February 5, 2013. (See our blog about the APP event and policy here) While the company has committed to the conservation policy, it is too soon to know whether or not they are achieving their objectives. Further, there are critical issues not addressed in the policy at all, such as working to restore forest lands that have been depleted by APP’s logging operations.

We encourage paper buyers and others to press APP to expand its Forest Conservation Policy to include the following proposed Milestones from the member groups of the Environmental Paper Network. The Milestones address gaps in APP’s policy and cover critical aspects of sustainable and responsible operations.  As opportunities arise, forest product customers can also press other companies in the forest industry in Indonesia, including Asia Pacific Resources International Limited (APRIL) and Royal Golden Eagle, to forward credible forest policies that safeguard Indonesia’s remaining conservation priority forests and support the advancement of local community rights.

Asia Pacific Resources International Limited (APRIL) is Indonesia’s second largest pulp and paper producer and the largest driver of deforestation in the sector.  APRIL is logging, or has plans to log, many of Indonesia’s most important remaining natural rainforests and tiger habitat, all in an effort to feed its mills. The firm is at the center of countless controversies over its practices, reaching from local communities through to international bodies such as the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC).

The company has faced allegations of unsustainable and socially egregious practices for years. APRIL and its affiliate The Royal Golden Eagle Group are now prohibited from carrying FSC certification following a complaint filed regarding non-compliance with FSC standards. The World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) has suspended APRIL from its Forest Solutions Group. Its membership in WEBCSD is on probation and the company has been given 12 months to show proof that it is changing its policies on deforestation or face expulsion.

APRIL also stands accused of knowingly pulping natural forest wood from concessions where licenses were issued through corrupt practices. The company obtained licenses from district representatives and Forestry Agency chiefs who were convicted and imprisoned for graft and corruption in the issuing of licenses. 

The logging of forests from carbon-rich deep peat in the Kampar Peninsula and islands of Riau’s coast has resulted in wide-spread and ongoing social conflicts between natural forest-dependent local communities and APRIL’s wood suppliers. In one desperate attempt to stop the logging of their traditional territory, residents of Pulau Padang sewed their mouths shut on the steps of the Indonesian Parliament to illustrate how their concerns were being silenced.

Why is Indonesian deforestation having an especially negative impact on our climate?

Indonesia’s rainforests are unique in their carbon-storage capacity. In addition to the trees, the peat in which they grow is a carbon sponge. When drained to support fast-growing palms and other plantation trees, the peat decays quickly, releasing its stored carbon into the atmosphere.

The Forest Stewardship Council considers forests growing in peat deeper than 25 centimetres to be of High Conservation Value. In Indonesia, rainforests frequently grow in peat more than 10 metres deep. That’s some deep peat! Some of the deepest anywhere, in fact.

The UK government-commissioned Stern Review on the Economics of Climate Change found that “curbing deforestation is a highly cost-effective way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions.” When you factor in its peat, that’s especially true for Indonesia’s forests.

Canopy Takes on Indonesian Rainforest Loss

Canopy is expanding its forest scope, appropriately enough, internationally. We’ve started campaigning to help conserve Indonesia’s rainforests, species and the world’s climate.

How? By helping North American publishers, printers, major clothing companies, and other large companies develop and implement environmental policies that prohibit the use of pulp from these important forests, Canopy will create the market incentives that have led to landmark conservation initiatives such as the Great Bear Rainforest Agreement. Canopy is helping to create a new powerbase for change in the global clothing market to ensure that dissolving pulp production does not expand to become a major pressure on Indonesia’s rainforests and other forests globally.

By educating business about the importance of Indonesia’s rainforests – for animals, people, and climate change – and helping them develop and implement policies we can help save these important places.



Photo credits:

Sumatra - © David Gilbert
Elephants - © WWF
Bulldozing - © Greenpeace
