General elections were held in Myanmar on 8 November 2015.[1][2] Voting occurred in all constituencies, excluding seats appointed by the military, to select Members of Assembly to seats in both the upper house (the House of Nationalities) and the lower house (the House of Representatives) of the Assembly of the Union, and State and Region Hluttaws.

These polls are the first openly-contested election held in the country since 1990. Official results released by 13 November gave the National League for Democracy an absolute majority of seats in both chambers of the national parliament, enough to ensure that its candidate would become president. While NLD leader Aung San Suu Kyi is constitutionally barred from the presidency (since she is the widow of a foreigner), she has let it be known that she will hold the real power in any NLD-led government.[3]

Contents  [hide] 
1	Preparation
1.1	Cancellation of by-elections
2	Possible candidates
3	Results
3.1	House of Nationalities
3.2	House of Representatives
3.3	State and Regional Hluttaws
3.3.1	Ethnic Affairs Ministers
4	Reactions
5	Elected representatives
5.1	House of Nationalities
5.2	House of Representatives
5.3	State/Regional Hluttaws
5.3.1	Ministers of Ethnic Affairs
6	Controversy
7	References
Preparation[edit]
As the election approached, the ruling Union Solidarity and Development Party confirmed it would contest its winning constituencies from 2010.[4] The opposition National League for Democracy party confirmed it would contest even if a constitutional measure barring Aung San Suu Kyi from running for president was not amended.[5]

The National Unity Party confirmed it would review its winning seats from 2010 and would consider other constituencies to challenge. The National Democratic Force said the party was prepared to challenge in as many as 200 constituencies but was still determining candidates. Ethnic political groups would contest in each state based on ethnic party strongholds, although some indicated they would consider forming an alliance as the Federal Union Party.

Before the election, 91 political parties were registered to take part in 2015.

In July 2015, Myanmar's Union Election Commission (UEC) designated the number of constituencies for running the upcoming 2015 general election of four levels of parliament representatives: 330 constituencies are set for elections to the House of Representatives (lower house of Pyidaungsu Hluttaw), 168 constituencies for the House of Nationalities (Amyotha Hluttaw or upper house of Pyidaungsu Hluttaw), 644 constituencies for regional or state parliaments and 29 constituencies for regional or state parliaments for national races. The UEC also issued procedures for international observers to follow in monitoring the country's upcoming 2015 general election preliminarily scheduled for the end of October or the beginning of November.[6]

The Union Election Commission cancelled elections in Kyethi and Mong Hsu townships in Shan State following armed clashes between the Tatmadaw and the insurgent Shan State Army - North. Despite calls by the Shan State Progressive Party to proceed with the elections, the UEC has denied the request, stating that it is not possible to hold free and fair elections in these areas. Elections were further cancelled in some villages in Hopang, Namtit, both of which fall within the nation's Wa Self-Administered Division, and under the control of the insurgent United Wa State Army. The cancellation of these elections will see the vacancy of 7 seats in the House of Representatives and 14 seats in the Shan State Hluttaw.

Cancellation of by-elections[edit]
By-elections had been scheduled to be held in November or December 2014, to elect members for six seats in the House of Nationalities, 13 in the House of Representatives, and 11 in state and regional legislatures. The seat vacancies were primarily the result of their former holders' moves to ministerial posts or departmental positions within government, but also included some other constituencies where representatives had died.[7][8][9][10] The by-elections were expected to indicate the relative strengths of the contending parties, including President Thein Sein's Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) and the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) party led by Aung San Suu Kyi.[8]

On 7 September 2014, the Union Election Commission cancelled the by-election because the period for campaigning would take place too close to that of the general elections in 2015 and because the results would therefore not have had any political significance.[11][12]

Possible candidates[edit]
President Thein Sein is front runner to continue as President after the election. Commander-in-Chief of the Military Min Aung Hlaing is close to retirement and is another favourite for the Presidency, but may assume the role after a transitional period headed by another ex-military figure. Aung San Suu Kyi has reiterated her desire to become the next president but constitutional changes need to take place before she would be allowed to run.[13] Although Parliament voted against most constitutional amendments on 25 June 2015 meaning that Aung San Suu Kyi cannot become president in the election,[14] Suu Kyi later stated that she would be "above the President" if the NLD won the elections.[15]

Shwe Mann, the former No. 3 in the junta who is now speaker of House of Representatives, considered reform-minded, was the most likely figure to take the mantle from Thein Sein until he was removed from his position within the party on 12 August 2015.[16][17]

Results[edit]

A polling station used for elections. The ballot boxes are at the front, while the voting booths are at the rear.
On 13 November 2015, the Union Election Commission announced results that increase the total number of seats held by the National League for Democracy in the Pyithu Hluttaw to 238, and the total number of seats in the Pyidaungsu Hluttaw to 348, surpassing the number of seats needed (50% + 1 for a total of 329, including seats cancelled in the election) to be the majority party in the National Assembly. With these seats, the NLD now has enough votes to elect the next President of Myanmar. The NLD's seat gains later extended to both houses of parliament, which give it control over national legislation, as well as the passing of bills.[18]

House of Nationalities[edit]

A ballot paper and rubber stamp in voting booth
168 of the 224 seats in the Amyotha Hluttaw (House of Nationalities) were up for election. The remaining 56 seats (25%) were not elected, and instead reserved for military appointees (taken from Tatmadaw personnel; officially known as "Army Representatives").
