Burma election: Aung San Suu Kyi’s NLD party clinches landslide victory
The Nobel laureate will be able to form next government and choose president as latest election results carry her National League for Democracy past winning line
Aung San Suu Kyi, chairperson of the National League for Democracy party, greets supporters during an election campaign rally in Yangoon
Aung San Suu Kyi's opposition party was confirmed on Friday as the winner of Burma's historic elections Photo: Nyein Chan Nang/EPA
Philip Sherwell By Philip Sherwell, Rangoon10:23AM GMT 13 Nov 2015
History has been made in Burma as Aung San Suu Kyi's pro-democracy opposition party was confirmed on Friday as the winner of historic elections held five days earlier.
The latest official election results delivered an unassailable lead to the National League for Democracy in the parliamentary elections. Ms Suu Kyi will be able to name the next president and form the new government.
Asked why so many people voted for her party, the Nobel laureate earlier told Radio Free Asia: “Our hearts beat in the same note. We struggled together, and we had hopes together.
“We dreamed together for nearly 30 years. The NLD and the people are comrades-in-arms. I think that is the reason they supported us."
The electoral triumph was declared official exactly five years after the world's most famous political prisoner was released from house arrest for a third and final time.
Ecstatic street celebrations had begun within hours of polls closing on Sunday as it became clear that the NLD led by Ms Suu Kyi was on course for a landslide.
Burma's opposition leader says her National League for Democracy will win 75 per cent of seats in historic elections that were 'not free' but 'fair' 
NLD supporters celebrate their predicted victory  Photo: AP
But confirmation of the win has been frustratingly slow for opposition supporters as the national election commission only releases results in batches with several hours gap between announcements.
"We dreamed together for nearly 30 years"
Aung San Suu Kyi
By Thursday evening, the latest constituencies announced pushed Ms Suu Kyi’s party to the brink of the crucial “super-majority” number in the country also known as Myanmar. And just after midday on Friday, it swept pass the 329 seats required in the two chambers to run the country.
Long a political favourite of Western leaders, Ms Suu Kyi has received telephone calls of congratulations from David Cameron, Barack Obama and Francois Hollande, the French president, the NLD said.
Aung San Suu Kyi (seated) speaks with a group of singers, film and television stars after hosting a thanksgiving breakfast at her residence in Yangoon for the celebrities who campaigned for her in the recent election
Aung San Suu Kyi (seated) speaks with a group of singers, film and television stars after hosting a thanksgiving breakfast at her residence in Yangoon for the celebrities who campaigned for her in the recent election  Photo: AFP
It is 55 years since Burma’s last democratically elected leader, the revered prime minister U Nu, won power at the ballot box. Just two years later, his army commander Ne Win overthrew him in a coup.
More than half a century later, the dominant military and its political proxies have admitted defeat, issuing strikingly magnanimous congratulations to the NLD for its election performance.
Their conciliatory messages appeared to end lingering fears that the military might overturn the result, as it did when the NLD won a previous election landslide in 1990.
A murales depicting Aung San Suu Kyi in front of the NLD party headquarters in Yangoon
A murales depicting Aung San Suu Kyi in front of the NLD party headquarters in Yangoon  Photo: Lynn Bo Bo/EPA
On Thursday morning, US President Barack Obama called Thein Sein, the general-turned-president, to congratulate him on the handling of the elections.
The returns will continue to be announced in coming days and it was not clear whether there would be formal victory or concession speeches by winners and losers before that process ends.
 
The NLD needed a crushing victory because the electoral cards were stacked against them by the military-drafted constitution.
That document allocates 25 per cent of seats to military appointees, so the NLD needed to win at least two-thirds of the constituencies being contested on Sunday to secure a clear majority in parliament.
That means that Ms Suu Kyi can now form the next government and nominate the new president without the help of coalition partners, although several smaller ethnic groupings will also side with the NLD.
There are of course some strict limitations, however. For a start, under the constitution drawn up to entrench military influence even after the elections, the army chief will appoint the three key ministerial portfolios of interior, defence and border areas.

And most obviously, despite her overwhelming popularity, Ms Suu Kyi – known to many Burmese simply as “mother” – cannot be nominated as president because of a clause that rules out any candidate with a foreign spouse or children. Ms Suu Kyi’s late husband was British, as are her two adult sons.
Ms Suu Kyi is expected to push for constitutional change at some stage, although the military bloc of appointed MPs – if they vote en masse – can block any such move.
In the meantime, she has made clear that she will govern the country, whatever her official title, through a nominee president who will follow her orders as the leader of the largest party.
Buddhist monks walk past the entrance to Burma's opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi's house in Rangoon on Friday
Buddhist monks walk past the entrance to Burma's opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi's house in Rangoon on Friday  Photo: Gemunu Amarasinghe/AP
Thein Sein, the outgoing president, Shwe Mann, the parliamentary speaker, and most significantly, Gen Min Aung Hlaing, the commander-in-chief, have agreed to meet Ms Suu Kyi to discuss the transition of power when the official results process is completed.
The talks between the former and current generals and the woman who was detained under house arrest by their former junta for 15 years are expected to take place next week.

So crushing has been the defeat of the ruling military-backed Union Solidarity and Development Party that when the new legislature is seated in February, there will be virtually no opposition presence to the NLD.
It is a remarkable reversal of fortunes at the ballot box following nearly 50 years of military dictatorship when the opposition had very different challenges.
