Burma's Road To Democracy: Free Elections Are A Start, But No Guarantee

Capital Flows , CONTRIBUTOR
Guest commentary curated by Forbes Opinion.
FOLLOW ON FORBES (441) 
Opinions expressed by Forbes Contributors are their own.

GUEST POST WRITTEN BY
Olivia Enos
Ms. Enos is a researcher in the Heritage Foundation’s Asian Studies Center.

A military-run country cannot be transformed overnight. (AP Photo/Khin Maung Win)

On Sunday, Burma held its first real democratic election in nearly 25 years. It was mostly free of violence, and has come off (so far) without major interference from the ruling party or the military.

The opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) led by Aung San Suu Kyi claimed to have won at least 88% of parliamentary seats earlier this week. On Friday, the party won an outright super majority in parliament, a landslide victory that affords the NLD the privilege of selecting the next president. The presidential process, which won’t occur until after January 31 of next year, requires the elected members of the lower house, the elected members of the upper house, and the military block to each select a vice presidential candidate. The NLD has enough seats, or 67% of the seats in the upper house and the lower house combined, to where they will be able to nominate two vice presidents. And due the NLD’s majority in parliament, they are guaranteed that at least one of their vice presidential candidates will become president.

If these results are honored by the current regime, the NLD has the potential to lead to a freer Burma.

Democracy, however, is more than free elections.

The rights and freedoms enshrined in democracy must be honored after people leave the polling station. And the next test is an honest counting of the ballot—a task which is not yet complete.

Annulling election results would not be unprecedented

The weeks between the completion of vote counting and parliament’s nomination of a new President will be a critical time, as well. How the current ruling party, the Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP), and the military conduct business during that interim period will indicate the resilience of reforms.

Recommended by Forbes
Burma, Once Obama Foreign Policy 'Milestone,' Turning Into Roadblock
Myanmar And Its Film Industry Fear Election Could Mark End Of Period Of Fr...
Burma Is A Bad Omen For Hopes Of Change In Cuba
MOST POPULAR Photos: 25 Best Places To Retire In 2015
+239,382 VIEWS How Paris ISIS Terrorists May Have Used PlayStation 4 To Discuss And Plan Attacks...

While USDP leadership says it will respect the election results, that remains to be seen. The Carter Center, a U.S. election observer in Burma, and the NLD have expressed concern over the delayed release of election results. Annulling election results would not be unprecedented in Burma: When the NLD was victorious in 1990, the military government refused to turn over power.

Free, but not fair

While relatively free of violence, last week’s elections were certainly not fair—principally because they were not inclusive. Hundreds of thousands of Burmese and all 1.3 million Rohingya, a Muslim minority group in Burma, were not allowed to vote. Suu Kyi is barred from being president by the Burmese constitution, which prohibits individuals from holding office if any of their immediate family members are citizens of a foreign country (Suu Kyi’s sons are British citizens). This clause, added in 2008, is largely considered to have been written explicitly for Suu Kyi.

Despite this, Suu Kyi has confidently stated that she will run the next government, even if she must appoint someone else as president. If she takes the helm in any fashion, the new government will experience exceeding goodwill both internally and internationally—providing an opening to significantly advance freedom in Burma.

But a military-run country cannot be transformed overnight.

Suu Kyi will face an uphill battle. The military will still play a major role in Burmese politics. It will continue to control key ministries, including the portfolios for Interior, Defense and Border Affairs. And the Burmese constitution specifies that 25% of seats in parliament are automatically allotted for the military. This grants the military nearly automatic veto over attempts to alter the privileged constitutional position it enjoys, since constitutional amendments require 75% of the vote to pass. Constitutional reform is likely to be a continuing challenge for the NLD.

Opportunities for the NLD

Suu Kyi will also have to address the disenfranchisement of, and discrimination against, Rohingya in Rakhine state. Reports from United States Holocaust Memorial Museum indicate early warning signs of genocide against the Rohingya (more than 100,000 people have been displaced). New leadership and the de-politicization of the Rohingya issue outside the context of the elections, presents an opportunity for new NLD leadership to improve a crisis that the international community is looking to Burma to resolve.

Finally, the international community should watch Burma’s economic freedom indicators closely. Economic freedom is closely linked to the proliferation of political freedom and human rights. The Heritage Foundation’s Index of Economic Freedom has documented improvements in Burma’s economic indicators in recent years. However, Burma is still ranked only 161 out of the 186 countries surveyed in terms of economic freedom. There is obviously room for improvement.

Reform won’t happen immediately

The success, thus far, of the elections and the NLD’s apparent landslide victory does not indicate that Burma’s process of democratic maturation is complete. In fact, now more than ever, the U.S. and the international community must encourage Burma to continue democratization.

The U.S. must call upon Burma and the newly minted NLD leadership to carry out true democratic reform. Expectations for reform should be tempered by the understanding that the reform process won’t happen immediately. Now is the time to charter a brighter course for Burmese reform, compel compliance with the election results, and—if a NLD-led or inspired government is formed—come alongside it to help realize reform.
