The world watched in horror as coordinated terrorist attacks killed scores of people -- concertgoers and restaurant diners -- in Paris on Friday night. Here's what we know about what's happening:

— The Islamic State on Saturday claimed responsibility for the attacks, which took place in at least six sites. French President Francois Hollande described the assaults as “an act of war." At least 129 people were killed.

— Of those killed, 89 died after terrorists stormed the Bataclan concert hall, where a California rock band, Eagles of Death Metal, were performing.

— "You think . . . what was that. You get down. You find yourself between dead bodies. You are afraid, you don't know what's happening – it's like you are in a dream. You go out onto the street there is no one, but there is blood everywhere," one witness from the scene at the concert hall recalled.

— One of the dead was an American, Nohemi Gonzalez, 20, a college student from California State University in Long Beach,

— Paris Prosecutor Francois Molins said that the seven terrorists who carried out the attacks are dead.

— In addition to the Bataclan, gunman attacked at least two restaurants and the Stade de France, a huge sports stadium in the north of the city.


At least 35 people were killed Friday in shootings and explosions around Paris, many of them in a popular concert hall where patrons were taken hostage, police and medical officials said. (Nov. 13) AP

— Fans at the Stade de France, where France was playing Germany, reported hearing explosions just outside the gates. The match continued.

Horrifying. This vine appears to capture the sound of explosions heard at or near the Stade de France in #Parishttps://t.co/JpU97zWKqf
— Natalie DiBlasio (@ndiblasio) November 13, 2015
— French President Francois Hollande had been at the soccer game but was escorted out after the explosions. He declared a state of emergency, mobilized the military and closed France's borders. Paris was under curfew for the first time since World War II.

— Hollande convened a Saturday morning meeting of his defense council, the government said in a statement. The president will not attend the G-20 meeting in Turkey; instead, France will be represented by foreign minister Laurent Fabius.

— Speaking after the security meeting, Hollande said Friday's attacks were "committed by a terrorist army, the Islamic State group, a jihadist army, against France, against the values that we defend everywhere in the world, against what we are: A free country that means something to the whole planet.”

— SITE Intelligence Group, a U.S. organization that monitors extremist websites, said jihadists were celebrating the attacks on social media.

— U.S. passengers bound for France are experiencing delays and cancellations. Aviation experts say it could be a while before passengers have any answers.

— President Obama condemned the violence. "Once again we've seen an outrageous attempt to terrorize innocent civilians," he said Friday. "This is an attack not just on Paris and not just on people of France, but this is an attack on all of humanity and the universal values that we share."

— U.K. Prime Minister David Cameron also expressed his shock over the attacks and pledged help.

— The supergroup U2 canceled a concert scheduled for Saturday night in Paris in the wake of the attacks. The concert, part of the Irish band's iNNOCENCE + eXPERIENCE world tour, was to have aired live on HBO. The Foo Fighters, Natalie Portman and Steven Spielberg also canceled Paris events.

I am shocked by events in Paris tonight. Our thoughts and prayers are with the French people. We will do whatever we can to help.
— David Cameron (@David_Cameron) November 13, 2015
— Parisians on Twitter used the hashtag #PorteOuverte, which translates to #OpenDoor, to offer shelter and safety to those 
