Paris terror attack: Everything we know so far on Monday afternoon as suspects' brother says: 'I did not know they had been radicalised'
Francois Hollande has given an historic speech at Versailles before the upper and lower houses of parliament - only the third time this has happened since 1848 - saying "France is at war"
 
Ellie Steafel By Eleanor Steafel, Rozina Sabur, Edward Malnick, Andrew Trotman and Nicola Harley5:43PM GMT 16 Nov 2015
What happened in Paris?
There were seven coordinated terror attacks in Paris carried out by militants, killing at least 129 people.
The first attacks were launched virtually simultaneously, with two explosions close to the Stade de France at just after 9.20pm local time, four miles apart.
The explosions came as a large crowd were enjoying the first half of the international friendly between France and Germany.

The Stade de france at the end of France v Germany on Friday night
The attacks then moved to central Paris, where a separate team of gunmen arrived in a black Seat at the Right Bank area of the city.
The attackers opened fire on the Petit Cambodge Cambodian restaurant in Rue Bichat, and the Le Carillon bar on the other side of the road.
With devastating coolness they gunned down diners and revellers at the two venues, killing 15 and sending a shockwave of terror through an area being enjoyed by many on their Friday night out.
The fourth attack came on Rue de la Fontaine au Roi, when the same unit of terrorists drove the 500 yards to eh Casa Nostra pizzeria and opened fire on diners, killing at least five.
French security moves people in the area of Rue Bichat in the 10th arrondissement of the French capital Paris following a string of attacks
French security moves people in the area of Rue Bichat in the 10th arrondissement of the French capital Paris following a string of attacks  Photo: AFP
From there, the militants drove around a mile south-east – apparently past the area of the Bataclan concert venue – to then launch another attack, this time on La Belle Equipe bar in Rue de Charonne. At least 19 people died after the terrace was sprayed with bullets at around 9.35pm.
The next attack, at the Bataclan concert venue in Boulevard Voltaire, was the most deadly. There, at least 89 people lost their lives when they were shot by black-clad gunmen wielding AK-47s and wearing suicide vests.
The attackers stormed into the hall and fired calmly and methodically at hundreds of screaming concert-goers, who were watching the US rock group Eagles of Death Metal playing to a full house of 1,500 people.
They began a siege that would last two hours and forty minutes. Two of the militants blew up their explosive belts as heavily armed anti-terror police ended the siege at around 12.30am. A third was shot by officers.
Members of the French fire brigade help an injured woman near the Bataclan concert hall following fatal shootings in Paris, France
Members of the French fire brigade help an injured woman near the Bataclan concert hall following fatal shootings in Paris, France  Photo: Reuters
Finally, at around 9.50pm a third blast took place near the Stade de France, this time by a McDonald’s restaurant on the fringes of the stadium.
The boom caused terror among spectators who had already been attempting to flee the stadium following the first two explosions.
The match had continued, with many attributing the initial noises to fireworks, but word soon spread of what had taken place outside the stadium, as people read updates on their mobile phones.
Read a full reconstruction of what happened on the night of Friday, November 13 here.
Casualties
A woman prays close to the Bataclan theatre in Paris, France
A woman prays close to the Bataclan theatre in Paris, France  Photo: Getty Images
At least 129 people have died, according to city officials, with many still in intensive care.
One Briton - Nick Alexander - has been confirmed by family to have lost his life at the Bataclan.
At least 89 people were killed in the concert hall. Three assailants were also killed after police stormed in - two by activating their suicide vests and a third shot dead.

A little further east at least 19 people died when the terrace of the La Belle Equipe in Rue de Charonne was sprayed with gunfire, while 15 people were killed at Le Carillon bar-cafe in Rues Bichat.
Five people at the Casa Nostra pizzeria and a nearby bar were killed by attackers wielding rifles.

The Belgian connection
In the Molenbeek area of Brussels, the police made seven arrests during a series of raids, at the order of the Brussels prosecutor Francoise Schepmans.
On Sunday afternoon, French media reported that three brothers were involved in the attacks and one may remain at large.
They are said to be:
Ibrahim Abdeslam - suicide bomber
Ibrahim Abdeslam was a suicide bomebr who blew himself up outside the Comptoir Voltaire restaurant in Paris. He rented the Seat Leon which was found abandoned in a Paris suburb with Kalashnikovs inside.
Salah Abdeslam - on the run
There is an international arrest warrant out for Salah Abdeslam - a French national who rented a black VW Polo in Belgium which was found abandoned near the Bataclan concert hall.
He was stopped near the Belgian border on Saturday morning in a grey VW golf also carrying two accomplices, but was not arrested at the time.
The wanted poster for  Salah Abdeslam, wanted in connection with the terror attacks in Paris
The wanted poster for Salah Abdeslam, wanted in connection with the terror attacks in Paris
The third brother, Mohamed Abdeslam, was arrested on Saturday in Brussels but was released on Monday without charge.
He has since released a statement saying he had no idea that his brothers had been radicalised.
He said: "My parents are truly shocked. I am thinking of the victims. I did not know that they had been radicalised."
Brother of two Paris attack suspects Mohammed Abdeslam was arrested and then let go by the police. Here, he speaks outside the family home
Brother of two Paris attack suspects Mohammed Abdeslam was arrested and then let go by the police. Here, he speaks outside the family home
Read more about the various connections to Belgium here.
Who were the other terrorists?

Omar Ismail Mostefai, 29, was identified by his finger, which was found among the rubble of the Bataclan concert hall. Police say he was one of three men who blew himself up killing 89 people in the bloodiest scene of the carnage. His father and brother, who handed himself in, are in custody and police are searching the family's home and the homes of his friends.
His brother told AFP that he had not seen Mostefai for years and said the attacks were "madness".
Paris attacker Omar Mustefai performing rap music
A video uncovered by French news outlet BFMTV seems to show Paris attacker Omar Mustefai performing rap music  Photo: BFMTV
Born on November 21 1985, in the poor Paris suburb of Courcouronnes, Mostefai's criminal record shows eight convictions for petty crimes between 2004 and 2010, but no jail time.
Paris prosecutor Francois Molins said Mostefai had been singled out as a high-priority target for radicalisation in 2010 but, before Friday, he had "never been implicated in an investigation or a terrorist association".
Investigators are now probing whether he took a trip to Syria last year, according to police sources.
Bilal Hadfi blew himself up outside gate H of the Stade de France. He is said to have fought with Isil in Syria, and came from Belgium.
Ahmad Al Mohammad died in a suicide bomb at the Stade de France. He was found with a Syrian passport bearing the name Ahmad Al Mohammad.
The 25-year-old was born in Idlib, a city in north-west Syria, and the Paris prosecutor's office said fingerprints from the attacker match those of a person who travelled through Greece last month.
Sami Amimour was one of the suicide bombers who blew himself up at the Bataclan music hall, the Paris prosecutor's office said. A 28-year-old Frenchman, he was known to French intelligence services.
He was charged with terror offences in 2012 and was placed under judicial supervision. But he later disappeared and an international arrest warrant was issued for him.
Three of his relatives were arrested early today, prosecutors said.
Belgian Abdelhamid Abaaoud was named by a French official as the suspected mastermind of the Paris attacks. The official said he has been linked to thwarted attacks on a Paris-bound high-speed train and a church in the Paris area.
Were there 20 attackers?
With seven suicide bombers dead, seven others under arrest and one man on the run, 15 men have so far been linked to the Paris attacks.
But Belgian intelligence officials have suggested that up to 20 people may have been part of the terrorist cell that planned the attacks, meaning a total of six people could be on the run.
Read a full account of what we know about the attackers so far here.
One attacker found with Syrian passport
A passport found near one of the suicide bombers at the Stade de France bore the name of Ahmad al-Mohammad.
It was used to register a refugee on the Greek island of Leros on October 3, and was then traced to Macedonia and an asylum claim in Serbia.
American intelligence officials have reported that the passport was clearly fake, based on the sequence of its serial number, something not apparently picked up on as its holder made his way through Europe.
Read more on this here.
Police at the scene following a shooting by a man with Kalashnikov near Place de la République in Paris
Police at the scene following a shooting by a man with Kalashnikov near Place de la République in Paris  Photo: Sky News
Arrests in France
French police say they have arrested six people close to the first gunman named Omar Ismail Mostefai, 29, who took part in the killings at the Bataclan concert hall.
It is now known that France conducted 23 arrests and seized 31 weapons in overnight raids in the wake of the Paris attacks.
Bernard Cazeneuve, the interior minister, has announced that police carried out 168 raids and have assigned 104 people to house arrest.
Cazeneuve said: "It's just a start, these operations are going to continue, the response of the Republic will be huge, will be total. The one who targets the Republic, the Republic will catch him, will be implacable."
The investigation into the attack spread to Belgium on Saturday where police arrested several suspects in Brussels.
Belgian police also carried out several raids in Brussels on Monday morning.
France fights back
On Sunday, France struck back at the heart of Islamic State, launching 20 airstrikes on the Syrian town of Raqqa, the defacto capital of the "caliphate".
In a joint operation with US forces, targets including a command post, a recruitment centre for jihadists, an arms depot and a terrorist training camp were destroyed, according to the French defence ministry.
Overnight on Sunday, anti-terrorism units also launched raids across France, in Toulouse, Grenoble, Calais and Paris. Several arrests were made and weapons have been seized.
Turkey notified France of suspect almost a year ago
Reuters is reporting that a senior Turkish official twice notified France about a suspect in December 2014 and June 2015.
The official also said that they received a request from France on Omar Ismail Mostefai after the attacks.
"We did, however, not hear back from France on the matter," added the official.
The Turkish official confirmed that Mostefai entered Turkey from the northwestern province of Edirne that borders EU members Greece and Bulgaria in 2013.
"There is no record of him leaving the country," said the Turkish official.
The official said that French authorities had only showed interest in Mostefai after the attacks.
"It was only after the Paris attacks that the Turkish authorities received an information request about Omar Ismail Mostefai from France."
He said that on October 10, 2014, Turkey received an information request regarding four terror suspects from the French authorities, but not for Mostefai even though he had been identified by Turkey as a potential terror suspect.
France in mourning
French people gathered together last nights in Paris to mourn the 129 people who lost their lives in the attacks.
A service was held at Notre Dame Cathedral and hundreds of people congregated at the Place de la Republique.
France held a two-minute silence at midday today (11am GMT).
Our correspondent Tom Rowley wrote from Paris:
A beautiful, life-affirming scene in the Place de la Sorbonne just now.
Inside, President Hollande marked a minute's silence for Friday's victims, but outside more than a thousand students entirely packed the square, which fell utterly still at midday.
A minute later, the applause rang out. One woman, who was sobbing, still put her hands together, determined to make some noise, to do something amid such helplessness.
Then, someone near the front of the crowd started singing La Marseillaise.
Soon, everyone joined in; some even shouted the words. All knew it by heart, but never before had it felt so potent.
When the singing ceased, there were two more - even louder - rounds of applause.
The students here were the same age as many killed on Friday - but they will not be silenced.
Hollande: France is at war
Francois Hollande has given an historic speech at Versailles before the upper and lower houses of parliament - only the third time this has happened since 1848.
He said: "France is at war. The acts committed on Friday night in Paris and at the Stade are acts of war, leaving at leat 129 dead and many wounded; this constitutes an attack against our country, against its values against its youth, against its way of life." Isil struck France because it is 'free' and 'the nation of human rights'.
"This is not a war of civilisation as these aassisins don't have any. This is a war against the jihadist menace that threatns not just France."
Mr Hollande called on the rest of Europe to control its borders and confirmed his intention to prolong France's state of emergency for three months.

 
 
Friday 13th Paris attacks
Times quoted refer to GMT
20.20

Spectators gather on the pitch of the Stade de France stadium. Photo: AFP
the first explosion went off near the Stade de France, where president Francois Hollande was at a football match between France and Germany. One person was killed in the blast. The body of a terrorist was found at the scene wearing a suicide belt filled with shrapnel.
20.25

Service personnel working outside the restaurant. Photo: Reuters
Shortly after the first explosion at the Stade de France, gunmen with Kalashnikovs launched an attack at Le Carillon bar and Le Petit Cambodge restaurant on Rue Bichat, in the city's 10th arrondissement, killing 15 people and injuring 10.
20.30
The attackers drove about 500 yards to the Casa Nostra pizzeria in Rue de la Fontaine au Roi and opened fire on diners on the terrace of the restaurant, killing at least five people and injuring eight.
20.30
Another explosion went off outside the Stade de France when a second suicide bomber blew himself up.
20.35

Forensic police search for evidences outside the La Belle Equipe cafe. Photo: Getty Images
Militants launch an attack on La Belle Equipe in Rue de Charonne, spraying the terrace bar with bullets and killing 19 people in gunfire which witnesses say lasted "two, three minutes".
20.50

Wounded people are evacuated outside the Bataclan theatre. Photo: EPA
Three black-clad gunmen wielding AK-47s and wearing suicide vests stormed Le Bataclan during a concert by American rock band Eagles Of Death Metal. At least 89 were killed and more than 100 others injured during the shooting. The attackers were heard mentioning Syria and Iraq during the massacre.
20.53
A third suicide bomber blew himself up on Rue de la Coquerie, near the Stade de France.
21.00

A woman is evacuated outside the Bataclan. Photo: AP
The first reports came in of the Bataclan massacre and within 10 minutes there was confirmation that a hostage crisis had developed at the theatre.
21.57
Prime Minister David Cameron said on Twitter: “I am shocked by events in Paris tonight. Our thoughts and prayers are with the French people. We will do whatever we can to help.”
22.00

An emotional French president Francois Hollande, who was earlier evacuated from the Stade de France, closed the borders and declared a state of national emergency. The French military were called into the centre of Paris.
22.16
Opposition leader Jeremy Corbyn said on Twitter: “My thoughts are with the people of Paris tonight. We stand in solidarity with the French. Such acts are heinous and immoral.”
22.28

Police officers gather outside the Bataclan concert venue in Paris. Photo: EPA
French emergency services activate Plan Rouge to tackle the large numbers of casualties.
22.30

Wounded people are evacuated from the Stade de France. Photo: EPA
Parisians used the #PorteOuverte hashtag to search for or offer safe places for those fleeing the violence. The hashtag was soon trending.
22.43
A new toll of at least 35 dead.
22.46
President Obama delivered a speech at the White House, expressing solidarity with the people of Paris and calling the attacks terrorist acts. "Those who think that they can terrorise the people of France or the values that they stand for are wrong."We are reminded in this time of tragedy that the bonds of liberte, egalite, fraternite, are not just the values French people share, but we share."Those go far beyond any act of terrorism or the hateful vision of those who perpetrated the crimes this evening."
23.30
Reports emerge of French taxi drivers turning off their meters and offering passengers free rides home. A citywide curfew was put in place, the first since 1944.
23.30

People receive medical attention after being evacuated from the Bataclan theatre. Photo: AP
Police storm the Bataclan, ending the siege. Two terrorists die after activating their suicide vests and a third is shot dead by officers.
Midnight
The death toll reached at least 120.
Saturday, November 14
00.46

French soldiers patrol the area at the foot of the Eiffel Tower. Photo: AFP
At least 1,500 soldiers have been called upon to patrol the streets of Paris.
03.30
Schools, markets, museums and major tourist sites in the Paris area are closed and sporting fixtures cancelled.
09.50
Hollande calls the attacks "an act of war... committed by a terrorist army, the Islamic State, against France, against... what we are, a free country". He declares three days of national mourning.
09.50
Isil claimed responsibility, saying in a statement issued in Arabic and French that the attackers had targeted "the capital of abominations and perversions and those who carry the crusader banner in Europe".
10.30

Passengers stand outside Gatwick airport after it was evacuated. Photo: @TimUnwin
Gatwick Airport north terminal was evacuated after a suspected firearm was discovered. A 41-year-old French national was taken into custody for questioning. He was later charged with possession of an air rifle and a knife.
11.00
David Cameron warned the UK "must be prepared for a number of British casualties", and condemned the "brutal and callous murderers. The Queen also sent a message of condolence to Mr Hollande, saying she and the Duke of Edinburgh had been "deeply shocked and saddened by the terrible loss of life in Paris".
12.00

A victim is wheeled out of the Bataclan concert hall. Photo: REUTERS/Charles Platiau
By noon on Saturday French officials had put the provisional death toll at 127 people from the combined attacks, with 180 injured and 99 people in hospital in critical condition.
13.30
One of the bombers was identified by his fingerprints as a young Frenchman flagged for links with Islamic extremism. He is later named as Ismaël Omar Mostefaï, 29.
17.00

Belgian policemen search for suspects in Molenbeek area (Brussels). Photo: Isopix/REX Shutterstock
A number of people are arrested in Brussels in relation to the Paris attack. Belgian prosecutors later confirmed they have opened an anti-terrorist investigation based on a car that was hired in Belgium and was found near the Bataclan concert hall.
18.00

Nick Alexander from Colchester was working at Bataclan.
One Briton is confirmed to have died and "a handful" of others are feared to have been killed. The British victim was later named as Nick Alexander, who was selling band merchandise at the Bataclan.
18.23

People gather to lay floral tributes and candles outside La Belle Equipe restaurant. Photo: Reuters
Francois Molins, the Paris prosecutor, said 129 people were confirmed dead and 352 people were injured, with 99 in a critical condition.
Sunday, November 15
10.30

Theresa May
Home Secretary Theresa May indicated the British death toll in the Paris attacks may rise as she said the government has concerns about a "handful" of UK citizens. She said that British police and intelligence agencies were "working day and night to keep people secure".

